This is a LibriVox recording. All LibriVox recordings are in the public domain. For more
information or to volunteer, please visit LibriVox.org.
Elizabeth was sitting by herself the next morning, and writing to Jane, while Mrs Collins
and Maria were gone on business into the village, when she was startled by a ring at the door,
the certain signal of a visitor. As she had heard no carriage, she thought it not unlikely
to be Lady Catherine, and under that apprehension was putting away her half-finished letter
that she might escape all impertinent questions, when the door opened, and, to her very great
surprise, Mr Darcy, and Mr Darcy only, entered the room. He seemed astonished, too, on finding
her alone, and apologised for his intrusion by letting her know that he had understood
all the ladies were to be within. They then sat down, and when her enquiries after rosings
were made, seemed in danger of sinking into total silence. It was absolutely necessary,
therefore, to think of something, and in this emergence, recollecting when she had seen
him last in Hertfordshire, and feeling curious to know what he would say on the subject of
departure, she observed,
How very suddenly you all quitted Netherfield last November, Mr Darcy. It must have been
a most agreeable surprise to Mr Bingley to see you all after him so soon, for if I recollect
right, he went about the day before. He and his sisters were well, I hope, when you left
London?
Perfectly so. I thank you.
She found that she was to perceive no other answer, and after a short pause, added,
I think I have understood that Mr Bingley has not much idea of ever returning to Netherfield
again. I have never heard him say so, but it is probable that he may spend very little
of his time there in the future. He has many friends, and is at a time of life when friends
and engagements are continually increasing. If he means to be but little at Netherfield,
it would be better for the neighbourhood that should give up the place entirely, for then
we might possibly get a settled family there. But perhaps Mr Bingley did not take the house
so much for the convenience of the neighbourhood as for his own, and we must expect him to
keep it, or quit it, on the same principle.
I should not be surprised, said Darcy, if he were to give it up as soon as any eligible
purchase offers. Elizabeth made no answer. She was afraid of talking longer of his friend,
and having nothing else to say, was now determined to leave the trouble of finding a subject
to him. He took the hint, and soon began with, This seems a very comfortable house. Lady
Catherine, I believe, did a great deal to it when Mr Collins first came to Hunsford.
I believe she did. I am sure she could not have bestowed her kindness on a more grateful
object. Mr Collins appears to be very fortunate in his choice of a wife. Yes, indeed, his
friend may well rejoice in his having met with one of the very few sensible women who
would have accepted him, or made him happy if they had. My friend has an excellent understanding,
though I am not certain that I consider her marrying Mr Collins as the wisest thing she
ever did. She seems perfectly happy, however, and in a prudential light it is certainly
a very good match for her. It must be very agreeable for her to be settled within so
easy a distance of her own family and friends. An easy distance, do you call it? It is nearly
50 miles. And what is 50 miles of good road? Little more than half a day's journey. Yes,
I call it a very easy distance. I should never have considered the distance as one of the
advantages of the match, cried Elizabeth. I should never have said Mrs Collins were
settled near her family. It is proof of your own attachment to Hertfordshire. Anything
beyond the neighbourhood of Longbourn, I suppose, would appear far. As he spoke, there was a
sort of smile which Elizabeth fancied she understood. He must be supposing her to be
thinking of Jane and Netherfield, and she blushed as she answered. I do not mean to
say that a woman may not be settled too near her family. The far and the near must be relative
and depend on many varying circumstances. Where there is fortune to make the expenses
of travelling unimportant, distance becomes no evil. But that is not the case here. Mr
and Mrs Collins have a comfortable income, but not such a one as will allow frequent
journeys. And I am persuaded my friend would not call herself near her family under less
than half the present distance. Mr Darcy drew his chair a little towards her and said, You
cannot have a right to such a very strong local attachment. You cannot have always been
at Longbourn. Elizabeth looked surprised. The gentleman experienced some change of feeling.
He drew back his chair, took a newspaper from a table, and glancing over it said, in a colder
voice, Are you pleased with Kent? A short dialogue on the subject of the country ensued,
on either side calm and concise, and soon put an end to by the entrance of Charlotte
and her sister just returned from her walk. The tete-a-tete surprised them. Mr Darcy related
the mistake, which had occasioned his intruding on Miss Bennet, and after sitting a few minutes
longer without saying much to anybody, went away. What can be the meaning of this, said
Charlotte as soon as he was gone? My dear Eliza, he must be in love with you, or he
would never have called us in this familiar way. But when Elizabeth told of his silence,
it did not seem very likely, even to Charlotte's wishes, to be the case, and after various
conjectures they could at last only suppose his visit to proceed from the difficulty of
to do, which was the more probable from the time of year. All field sports were over.
Within doors there was Lady Catherine, books, and a billiard table, but gentlemen cannot
always be within doors, and in the nearness of the parsonage, or the pleasantness of the
walk to it, or of the people who lived in it, the two cousins found a temptation from
this period of walking thither almost every day. They called at various times of the morning,
sometimes separately, sometimes together, and now and then accompanied by their aunt.
It was plain to them all that Colonel Fitzwilliam came because he had pleasure in their society,
a persuasion which of course recommended him still more, and Elizabeth was reminded by
her own satisfaction in being with him, as well as by her evident admiration of her,
of her former favourite George Wickham, and though in comparing them she saw there was
less captivating softness in Colonel Fitzwilliam's manners, she believed he might have the best
informed mind. But why Mr Darcy came so often to the parsonage, it was more difficult to
understand. It could not be for society, as he frequently sat there ten minutes together
without opening his lips, and when he did speak, it seemed the effort of necessity rather
than of choice, a sacrifice to propriety, not a pleasure to himself. He seldom appeared
really animated. Mrs Collins knew not what to make of him. Colonel Fitzwilliam's occasionally
laughing at his stupidity proved that he was generally different, which her own knowledge
of him could not have told her. And as she would like to believe that this changed the
effect of love, and the object of that love, her friend Eliza, she set herself seriously
to work to find it out. She watched him whenever they were at Rosings, and whenever he came
to Hunsford, but without much success. He certainly looked at her friend a great deal,
but the expression of that look was disputable. It was an earnest, steadfast gaze, but she
often doubted whether there was much admiration in it, and sometimes it seemed nothing but
absence of mind. She had once or twice suggested to Elizabeth the possibility of his being
partial to her, but Elizabeth always laughed at the idea, and Mrs Collins did not think
it right to press the subject from the danger of raising expectations which might only end
in disappointment, for in her opinion it admitted not a doubt that all her friend's dislike
would vanish if she could suppose him to be in her power. In her kind schemes for Elizabeth,
she sometimes planned her marrying Colonel Fitzwilliam. He was beyond comparison the
most pleasant man. He certainly admired her, and his situation in life was most eligible.
But to counterbalance these advantages, Mr Darcy had considerable patronage in the church,
and his cousin could have none at all. Chapter 33
More than once did Elizabeth, in her ramble within the park, unexpectedly meet Mr Darcy.
She felt all the perverseness of the mischance that should bring him when no one else was brought,
and, to prevent its ever happening again, took care to inform him at first that it was
her favourite haunt of hers. How it could occur a second time, therefore, was very odd. Yet it did,
and even a third. It seemed like wilful ill-nature, or a voluntary penance, for on those occasions it
was not merely a few formal inquiries and an awkward pause and then away, but he actually
thought it necessary to turn back and walk with her. He never said a great deal, nor did she give
herself the trouble of talking or of listening much, but it struck her in the course of their
third rencontre that he was asking some odd, unconnected questions about her pleasure in being
at Hunsford, her love of solitary walks, and her opinion of Mr and Mrs Collins's happiness,
and that in speaking of Rosings and her not perfectly understanding the house,
he seemed to expect that whenever she came into Kent again she would be staying there too.
His words seemed to imply it. Could he have Colonel Fitzwilliam in his thoughts?
She supposed, if he meant anything, he must mean an allusion to what might arise in that quarter.
It distressed her a little, and she was quite glad to find herself at the gate in the pails
opposite the parsonage. She was engaged one day, she walked, in perusing Jane's last letter
and dwelling on some passages which proved that Jane had not written in spirits,
when instead of being again surprised by Mr Darcy, she saw one looking up that Colonel Fitzwilliam
was meeting her. Putting away the letter immediately and forcing a smile, she said,
I did not know before that you ever walked this way.
I have been making a turn of the park, he replied, as I generally do every year,
and intend to close it with a call at the parsonage. Are you going much farther? No,
I should have turned in a moment. And accordingly she did turn, and they walked towards the
parsonage together.
Do you certainly leave Kent on Saturday? said she. Yes, if Darcy does not put it off again,
but I am at his disposal. He arranges the business just as he pleases.
And if not able to please himself in the arrangement, he has at least pleasure in
the great power of choice. I do not know anybody who seems to enjoy the power of doing what he
likes more than Mr Darcy. He likes to have his own way very well, replied Colonel Fitzwilliam,
but so we all do. It is only that he has better means of having it than many others,
because he is rich and many others are poor. I speak feelingly, a younger son, you know,
must be inured to self-denial and dependence. In my opinion, the younger son of an earl can
know very little of either. Now seriously, what have you ever known of self-denial and dependence?
When have you been prevented by want of money from going wherever you choose,
or procuring anything you had a fancy for? These are home questions and perhaps I cannot
say that I have experienced many hardships of that nature, but in matters of greater weight,
I may suffer from want of money. Younger sons cannot marry where they like, unless where they
like women of fortune, which I think they very often do. Our habits of expense make us too
dependent and there are too many in my rank of life who can afford to marry without some attention
to money. Is this, thought Lisbeth, meant for me? And she coloured at the idea, but recovering
herself said in a lively tone, and pray, what is the usual price of an earl's younger son,
unless the elder brother is very sickly, I suppose you would not ask above fifty thousand pounds?
He answered her in the same style and the subject dropped. To interrupt a silence which might make
him fancy her affected with what had passed, she soon afterwards said, I imagine your cousin
brought you down with him chiefly for the sake of having someone at his disposal. I wonder he does
not marry to secure a lasting convenience of that kind, but perhaps his sister does as well for the
present, and as she is under his sole care, he may do what he likes with her. No, said Colonel Fitz
William, that is an advantage which he must divide with me. I am joined with him in the guardianship
of Miss Darcy. Are you indeed? And pray, what sort of guardians do you make? Does your charge give
you much trouble? Young ladies of her age are sometimes a little difficult to manage, and if
she has the true Darcy spirit, she may like to have her own way. As she spoke, she observed him
looking at her earnestly, and the manner in which he immediately asked her why she supposed Miss
Darcy likely to give them any uneasiness convinced her that she had somehow or other got pretty near
the truth. She directly replied, you need not be frightened, I never heard any harm of her,
and I dare say she is one of the most tractable creatures in the world. She is a very great
favourite with some ladies of my acquaintance, Mrs Hurst and Miss Bingley, I think I have heard
you say that you know them. I know them a little, their brother is a pleasant gentleman-like man,
he is a great friend of Darcy's. Oh yes, said Elizabeth Dryley, Mr Darcy is uncommonly kind
to Mr Bingley, and takes a prodigious deal of care of him. Care of him? Yes, I really believe
Darcy does take care of him in those points where he most wants care. From something that he told me
in our journey hither, I have reason to think Bingley very much indebted to him. But I want
to beg his pardon, for I have no right suppose that Bingley was the person meant, it was all
conjecture. What is it that you mean? It's a circumstance which Darcy would not wish to be
known, because if it were to get round to the ladies' family it would be an unpleasant thing.
You may depend on my not mentioning it. And remember that I have not much reason for
supposing it to be Bingley? What he told me was merely this, that he congratulated himself on
having lately saved a friend from the inconveniences of a most imprudent marriage, but without
mentioning names or any other particulars. And I only suspected it to be Bingley from believing him
the kind of young man to get into a scrape of that sort, and from knowing them to have been
together the whole of last summer. Did Mr Darcy give you reasons for this interference?
I understand there were some very strong objections against the lady. And what art did he use to
separate them? He did not talk to me of his own art, said Fitzwilliam smiling, he only told me what
I have now told you. Elizabeth made no answer and walked on, her heart swelling with indignation.
After watching her a little, Fitzwilliam asked her why she was so thoughtful.
I am thinking of what you have been telling me, said she. Your cousin's conduct does not suit
my feelings. Why was he to be the judge? You are rather disposed to call his interference
officious? I do not see what right Mr Darcy had to decide on the propriety of his friend's inclination,
or why, upon his judgment alone, he was to determine and direct in what manner his friend
was to be happy. But, she continued, recollecting herself, as we know none of the particulars,
it is not fair to condemn him, it is not to be supposed that there was much affection in the case.
That is not an unnatural surmise, said Fitzwilliam, but it is a lessening of the honour of my cousin's
triumph, very sadly. This was spoken jestingly, but it appeared to her so just a picture of Mr
Darcy that she would not trust herself with an answer, and therefore abruptly changing the
conversation, talked on indifferent matters until they reached the parsonage. There, shut into her
own room, as soon as their visitor left them, she would think without interruption of all that she
had heard. It was not to be supposed that any other people could be men than those with whom
she was connected. There could not exist in the world two men over whom Mr Darcy could have such
boundless influence. That he had been concerned in the measures taken to separate Bingley and
Jane she had never doubted, but she had always attributed to Miss Bingley the principal design
and arrangement of them. If his own vanity, however, did not mislead him, he was the cause,
his pride and caprice were the cause of all that Jane had suffered, and still continued to suffer.
He had ruined for a while every hope of happiness for the most affectionate, most generous heart in
the world, and no one could say how lasting an evil he might have inflicted. There were some very
strong objections against the lady, were Colonel Fitzwilliam's words, and those strong objections
probably were her having one uncle who was a country attorney and another who was in business
in London. To Jane herself, she exclaimed, there could be no possibility of objection,
or loveliness and goodness as she is, her understanding excellent, her mind improved,
and her manners captivating. Neither could anything be urged against my father, who,
though with some peculiarities, has abilities Mr Darcy himself need not disdain,
and respectability which he will probably never each. When he thought of her mother,
her confidence gave away a little, but she would not allow that any objections there had material
weight with Mr Darcy, whose pride, she was convinced, would receive a deeper wound from
the want of importance in his friend's connections than from their want of sense, and she was quite
excited at last that he had been partly governed by this worst kind of pride, and partly by the
wish of retaining Mr Bingley for his sister. The agitation and tears which the subject occasioned
brought on a headache, and it grew so much worse towards the evening that, added to her unwillingness
to see Mr Darcy, it determined her not to attend her cousins to Rosings, where they were engaged
to drink tea. Mrs Collins, seeing that she was really unwell, did not press her to go,
and as much as possible prevented her husband from pressing her, but Mr Collins could not
conceal his apprehension at Lady Catherine's being rather displeased by her staying at home.
End of chapter 33